

Sneppen2009 - Modeling proteasome dynamics in Parkinson's disease

This model is described in the article:

[Modeling proteasome dynamics in Parkinson's
disease.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/19411740)

Sneppen K, Lizana L, Jensen MH, Pigolotti S, Otzen D.

Phys Biol 2009; 6(3): 036005

Abstract:

In Parkinson's disease (PD), there is evidence that alpha-synuclein (alphaSN)
aggregation is coupled to dysfunctional or overburdened protein quality
control systems, in particular the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Here, we
develop a simple dynamical model for the on-going conflict between alphaSN
aggregation and the maintenance of a functional proteasome in the healthy
cell, based on the premise that proteasomal activity can be titrated out by
mature alphaSN fibrils and their protofilament precursors. In the presence of
excess proteasomes the cell easily maintains homeostasis. However, when the
ratio between the available proteasome and the alphaSN protofilaments is
reduced below a threshold level, we predict a collapse of homeostasis and
onset of oscillations in the proteasome concentration. Depleted proteasome
opens for accumulation of oligomers. Our analysis suggests that the onset of
PD is associated with a proteasome population that becomes occupied in
periodic degradation of aggregates. This behavior is found to be the general
state of a proteasome/chaperone system under pressure, and suggests new
interpretations of other diseases where protein aggregation could stress
elements of the protein quality control system.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000548](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000548).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

